in module 6 we will take a look at
sequential CMOS circuits and how they
can be integrated with combinational
CMOS to form synchronous pipelines first
we have to distinguish between
combinational circuits and sequential
circuits so far we have dealt with
combinational circuits the definition of
a combinational circuit is a circuit
whose output F is a function of its
inputs and only its inputs so the
function is the output is a function a
combinational function a combination of
the inputs it is a boolean combination
of the inputs and that's it so if we
have logic inputs if any of the logic
inputs change generally the output will
change it will not change
instantaneously it will take a
propagation delay to change but we
assume that any input change will lead
to an output change the amount of time
that separates the change in the input
from the change in the output will vary
depending on which input combination has
caused the change but we will always see
a change in response and changing the
output and response to a change in the
inputs a change in the output is
unconditional and will always happen and
this is what defines a combinational
circuit and this is as opposed to a
sequential circuit a sequential circuit
does not always observe an output that
is a function of inputs the sequential
circuit has an output that is sometimes
the value of the input and that other
times it is a value that is stored it is
an old value and therefore we need a
signal to tell us whether the output is
following the input or is a combination
of the input or whether the output is
preserving an old value and this control
signal that switches or multiplexers
between these two modes for the output
is called the clock signal so why is a
sequential element
sequential so let's look at a very
common piece of code that is used to
exchange the values in two variables or
two registers a and B so let's assume we
want to exchange the values contained an
a and B what we do is that we first use
an intermediate register or intermediate
variable and we put the value of a in
the intermediate value of T and then we
assign the value of of a of B to a and
then we assign the value of T to B so
this way we have exchanged the values
contained in a and B now imagine that
this piece of code which has the
variable swap code which is a very
well-known piece of code actually
describes Hardware connections so let's
imagine that a B and T are nodes
electrical nodes in a circuit rather
than registers of variables they are
actual Hardware nodes then these three
statements describe the the sky
connections between these two between
these three nodes so the first statement
connects node a to node T the second
statement connects node a to node B and
the third statement is actually
redundant because all it does is
connects node T to no B which are
already connected through node a so if
this was a description of Hardware
connections it will not eight achieve
variable exchange or variable swap what
it will do is that it will short-circuit
the three nodes to each other ensuring
that all three of them have the same
value at all times but in order for this
to perform variable swap in order for
this to exchange the values in a and B
we have to have an intermediate storage
element called T in which to temporarily
store the value of a another thing is
that for variable swap to happen we
to execute these three statements in
order if these three statements describe
Hardware connections then the order in
which they are stated does not matter it
is just connections there is no
significance to the order but for them
to execute variable swap the order has
to be observed so this has to be
statement number one this has to be the
statement remember - and this has to be
statement number three if you exchange
any of these two statements with
exchange their order then a variable
swap will not be achieved so we find
that to perform variable swap we have to
have an intermediate storage for the
value T so there has to be storage and
storage immediately tells us that we
have memory and we find that having
memory or storage is necessary to
perform a sequence of operations so if
we need sequencing if we need something
that follows a certain order we cannot
use combinational circuits we have to
use sequential circuits and they are
called sequential because they allow us
to perform a sequence of operations a
sequential element will by necessity
have memory because this is what allows
us to perform a sequence memory that
stores intermediate results and having a
memory by necessity suggests that we
have a control signal to distinguish
between storing mode and transparent
mode this control signal is called the
clock now we have to think about what
storage mechanisms we have available
that allow us to realize memories so
that we can form sequential elements
there is a storage element a storage
mechanism that we considered in module 5
which was a capacitor with open circuits
in all directions so storing on the high
impedance node is a valid method of
storage the capacitance will keep the
value whether it's VDD or zero volt will
keep its value indefinitely as long as
there are perfect open circuit
in all directions this method of storage
is called dynamic storage and it will
lead us down the path of dynamic latches
and dynamic registers which are valid
storage elements that would be very
important but we have to have a static
counterpart we have to have a static
storage mechanism because we know that
dynamic storage mechanisms are not very
robust they are susceptible to leakage
to charge sharing to all these signal
integrity issues that affect dynamic
logic so we have to find a static
storage mechanism now consider this
circuit okay we don't even have to use
an end we can using just a NAND gate so
we have a NAND gate and the input to the
end gate is variable X and variable X
bar so they are a valuable and it's
complement strictly speaking we should
think of the output of the NAND of the
and gate as always known because we just
have zero inputs all the time however
let's consider this step like when the
connects makes a positive step and
that's consider the fact that X bar is
the complement of X but through an
inverter and so the inverter has some
delay and X bar takes some time for its
output to drop down to zero and so there
is an interval of time during which both
X and X bar are one allowing us to
produce an F and output from the circuit
that is an impulse of 1 and the duration
of this impulse is the delay of the
inverter and is not produced immediately
after X bar out after X rises but takes
some delay and this is the delay of the
end gate now this kind of circuit is
called a monostable circuit because it
has one stable state F has one stable
state which is 0 F can't
the value of one but when it does take
the value of one it can only remain
there for a finite period of time equal
to Delta inverter it will always go back
to its stable state which is none which
is zero
so note F is not suitable for storage
it's not a suitable memory location
because it cannot support an indefinite
storage of either 0 1 it can only remain
stable at 0 now let's consider the
situation where we have three inverters
or any odd number of inverters connected
in feedback now if there is a 0 at the
output of the third inverter this 0 will
pass through the first inverter
producing a 1 through the second
inverter producing 0 and this 0 would
produce a 1 at the output of the first
inverter and so if we look at North F
which is the output of the first
inverter so note F will remain at 0 and
then will rise back up to 1 after 3
inverter delays so this is 3 Delta
inverter but this one would also travel
through the three inverters updating to
0 and updating this node to 1 and
updating F back to 0 so in another 3
Delta inverter it will go back down to 0
and the 0 travel again and update back
to 1 and so forth and so we find that no
death in fact any node in this circuit
is gonna be oscillating it's gonna be an
oscillator it's gonna produce a square
wave whose period is 6 Delta inverter
and we have the same situation with any
connection of an odd number of inverters
in feedback now note F is not suitable
as a storage node either because note F
cannot support either 1 or 0 in a steady
state in fact we call not a fan a stable
node it is completely unstable
it can never remain as 0 can never
remain at 1 it will always switch from 0
or 1 to the other state
which is why it oscillates so it is not
a suitable storage node now let's look
at two inverters connected in feedback
or actually any even number of inverters
let's look at North F if no def contains
a value of zero the zero travelled
through the first inverter producing a
one at the input of the second inverter
this one at the input of the second
inverter reinforces the zero at the
output of the second inverter and so no
math can remain at zero indefinitely no
death can also remain at one
indefinitely and not only can it remain
at zero one it is a regenerative zero of
one if there is any noise that adds some
voltage to our the zero volt at node F
the first inverter will take care of
that and will return it back to zero
through the pulldown path and so this is
an active and regenerative storage it is
a static storage and we call node F a
bi-stable node because it has two
possible stable States 0 and 1 and
therefore mode F is perfectly suitable
for storage and this storage mechanism
is our storage mechanism of choice for
static memories